Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch (#1300)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2023-01-23-OpenSearch-Flink-Connector.markdown

There are two API favors that [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) supports: the DataStream API and the Table API. The Table API is the most convenient way to start off with OpenSearch since it relies on SQL, familiar to many users. Follow the [official instructions](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.16/docs/connectors/table/opensearch/) on how to download the SQL flavor of the connector and deploy it in your Apache Flink cluster. 

## Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch in action

Follow the [dedicated instructions on setting up an OpenSearch cluster](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/opensearch/install/index/). The fastest way to get an OpenSearch cluster running locally is by spawning a Docker container.

```
docker run -d                           \
    -p 9200:9200                        \
    -p 9600:9600                        \
    -e "discovery.type=single-node"     \
    opensearchproject/opensearch:2.4.1
```

> The latest OpenSearch version as of today is **2.4.1**, however the [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) can also be used with the older **1.x** release line. 

Author: Seems like 2.5 is a bit behind, still no official announcement, I will add the suggestion and update OpenSearch with 2.5.0 once it is out.

> The latest OpenSearch version as of today is **2.4.1**, however the [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) can also be used with the older **1.x** release line. 

Author: Updated, thanks @kolchfa-aws !

> The latest OpenSearch version as of today is **2.4.1**, however the [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) can also be used with the older **1.x** release line. 

Author: 2.5.0 tag was just pushed (https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/releases/tag/2.5.0), updated the release

Since the [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) is hosted under the [Apache Software Foundation](https://www.apache.org/), anyone could contribute to it. 

The process is very simple:

* Create a JIRA issue at https://issues.apache.org/jira/projects/FLINK
* Submit a pull request to https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/
* Optionally, once pull request is merged, ask for connector release by [following release process procedure](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/Creating+a+flink-connector+release)

Apache Flink has a large community and is being actively developed. It might happen that reviewing and merging changes could take some time but that should not discourage anyone from contributing. One of the interesting new features being developed is the implementation of a new generation of sinks, based on [FLIP-171: Async Sink](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-171%3A+Async+Sink) proposal. The [related pull request](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/pull/5) is already open, please feel free to check it out and contribute! 

> If you want to get involved or just stay aware of what is happening in Apache Flink community, please consider subscribing to the [mailing list](https://flink.apache.org/community.html#how-to-subscribe-to-a-mailing-list) or joining the official [Slack channel](https://flink.apache.org/community.html#slack). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to get involved or just be aware of what is happening in the Apache Flink community, please consider subscribing to the [mailing list](https://flink.apache.org/community.html#how-to-subscribe-to-a-mailing-list) or joining the official [Slack channel](https://flink.apache.org/community.html#slack). 
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Apache Flink® Connector for OpenSearch®"
authors:
- ftisiot
- reta
date: 2022-01-31
categories:
 - technical-post

excerpt: "Apache Flink® and OpenSearch® are widely known and successful open source projects. Even if you have never used them, it is likely you have heard or read about them in search or streaming data transformation use cases. And there are reasons for that: although they target different tech markets, they perform their job very well."
---

> 

Reviewer 2: Please add front matter here using the provided below: 

**Meta Keywords:** Apache Flink Connector to OpenSearch, open source data processing, Aiven for Apache Flink
**Meta Description:**  Learn how Aiven uses the Apache Flink Connector data processing solution to write from Apache Flink to an index of the OpenSearch engine.

> excerpt: "Apache Flink® and OpenSearch® are widely known and successful open source projects. Even if you have never used them, it is very likely you have heard or read about them in the search or streaming data transformation use-cases. And there are reasons for that: although they are targeting different tech markets, they perform their job very well."

Author: I mean "use cases" are general streaming data transformations: take from one place, transform, put into another place. I am not sure we could clarify without going into concrete problem.

> excerpt: "Apache Flink® and OpenSearch® are widely known and successful open source projects. Even if you have never used them, it is very likely you have heard or read about them in the search or streaming data transformation use-cases. And there are reasons for that: although they are targeting different tech markets, they perform their job very well."

Reviewer 3: @reta Ok, if we're just referring to use cases generally, then we should probably remove "the", which implies that we're referring to some specific use cases. Would "...it is likely you have heard or read about them in search or streaming data transformation use cases" work?

> excerpt: "Apache Flink® and OpenSearch® are widely known and successful open source projects. Even if you have never used them, it is very likely you have heard or read about them in the search or streaming data transformation use-cases. And there are reasons for that: although they are targeting different tech markets, they perform their job very well."

Author: Apologies, that's what the current wording says:

> Even if you have never used them, it is very likely you have heard or read about them in the search or streaming data transformation use-cases.

Apache Flink® and OpenSearch® are widely known and successful open source projects. Even if you have never used them, it is very likely you have heard or read about them in the search or streaming data transformation use cases. And there are reasons for that: although they are targeting different tech markets, they perform their job very well. 

This post will help you understand how the Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch bridges both projects together by enabling to push the outcome of data transformations directly to an OpenSearch index.

![Flink + OpenSearch](flink_opensearch.png)

## What is Flink?

From the [official website](https://flink.apache.org/) of the project:

> Apache Flink is a framework and distributed processing engine for stateful computations over unbounded and bounded data streams. Flink has been designed to run in all common cluster environments, perform computations at in-memory speed and at any scale.

> Apache Flink started from a fork of Stratosphere's distributed execution engine and became an Apache Incubator project in March 2014. In December 2014, Flink was accepted as an Apache top-level project.

Author: I believe we need full project name to not confuse readers

> Apache Flink started from a fork of Stratosphere's distributed execution engine and became an Apache Incubator project in March 2014. In December 2014, Flink was accepted as an Apache top-level project.

Reviewer 4: I would, for consistency, always refer to Apache Flink

> Apache Flink started from a fork of Stratosphere's distributed execution engine and became an Apache Incubator project in March 2014. In December 2014, Flink was accepted as an Apache top-level project.

Reviewer 4: but this is a personal preference, not a must have

Flink is both a **framework**, providing the basics to create apps in Java, Python, and Scala, and a **distributed processing engine**, which can scale vertically and horizontally.
It is used to create data pipelines over both unbounded (e.g. streaming) and bounded (batch) datasets, offering various levels of abstractions depending on the computation needs.
Data is sourced and sinked via dedicated pluggable connectors, similarly to Apache Kafka. The Flink connector ecosystem is continuously evolving with new technologies being added regularly.

> All the principles listed above make Apache Flink a go-to open source data processing solution for a wide variety of industries and use cases.

Author: I would argue those are "principles" (or design choices if you will) but not "features".

> All the principles listed above make Apache Flink a go-to open source data processing solution for a wide variety of industries and use cases.

Reviewer 3: Ok, let's go with "All of these principles". We want to avoid "above" for accessibility purposes.

## Why did Aiven choose Flink over other options?

Aiven applies dogfooding: Aiven runs on Aiven, meaning that we operate on the same data infrastructure we offer to our clients. Our standard approach is to evaluate open-source solutions for our internal needs, gain experience, make them robust and then, once we’re confident, offer them to our clients. 

> The same happened with Apache Flink, which was chosen because it’s open source (Aiven loves open source and we have a [dedicated OSPO team](https://aiven.io/blog/aivens-open-source-program-office)), and because it has a great and variegated community. 

Reviewer 4: What about?

> We took the same approach with Flink, which was chosen because it’s open source (Aiven loves open source, and we have a [dedicated OSPO team](https://aiven.io/blog/aivens-open-source-program-office)) and because it has a large, varied and supportive community.

> The same happened with Apache Flink, which was chosen because it’s open source (Aiven loves open source and we have a [dedicated OSPO team](https://aiven.io/blog/aivens-open-source-program-office)), and because it has a great and variegated community. 

Reviewer 3: @ftisiot Sounds great! Let's add the serial comma after "varied", though.

> The same happened with Apache Flink, which was chosen because it’s open source (Aiven loves open source and we have a [dedicated OSPO team](https://aiven.io/blog/aivens-open-source-program-office)), and because it has a great and variegated community. 

Author: @ftisiot could you please make it a suggestion so I would make the right change, thank you.

> The same happened with Apache Flink, which was chosen because it’s open source (Aiven loves open source and we have a [dedicated OSPO team](https://aiven.io/blog/aivens-open-source-program-office)), and because it has a great and variegated community. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We took the same approach with Flink, which was chosen because it’s open source (Aiven loves open source, and we have a [dedicated OSPO team](https://aiven.io/blog/aivens-open-source-program-office)) and because it has a large, varied, and supportive community.
```

On the technical side, Flink has all the qualifications to become the de facto standard in data processing since it:

* Unifies unbounded and bounded data pipelines, making the transition from batch to streaming a matter of just redefining data sources/sinks
* Decouples compute from data storage, meaning that it's possible to change the backend without needing to re-architect the transformation layer
* Scales both vertically and horizontally to accommodate large workloads
* Offers a rich SQL interface that covers all our data transformations needs
* Offers a variety of language SDKs at various abstraction levels
* Works natively with other open-source tools like PostgreSQL®, Apache Kafka® and now OpenSearch

## How does Aiven use Flink?

> The spread of [Apache Flink’s SQL functions](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/functions/systemfunctions/) means that Flink can be used to define a vast variety of data pipelines. Apart from the traditional analytical or filtering workloads, Aiven is using or planning to use Flink for two main use cases:

Reviewer 4: Fine by me

## What is the best way to get started with Flink?

[Apache Flink’s documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/) is awesome, because it covers both the theory behind the tool and the tool's practical usage in great detail.

To start defining the first data pipelines, it might be helpful to use the highest level of abstraction in Flink represented by its SQL layer. You can play with a [Docker version of Flink](https://github.com/aiven/sql-cli-for-apache-flink-docker), which offers bare-bones capabilities, or explore a slicker experience on [Aiven for Apache Flink](https://aiven.io/flink?utm_source=blog&utm_medium=organic&utm_campaign=blog_opensearch_flink_opensearch_connector).

If you’re looking for a practical example, check out [how to build a real-time alerting solution](https://docs.aiven.io/docs/products/flink/howto/real-time-alerting-solution) with Apache Flink and a few SQL statements.

## What does the Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch do?

> The [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) allows writing from Apache Flink into an index of the [OpenSearch](https://opensearch.org/) engine (sink side). It does not support reading from the index (source side). The connector is quite a recent addition to the long list of connectors supported by Apache Flink and is available starting from release **1.16**. 

Author: I don't think so, example from similar domains: "MySQL table", "MongoDB collection" - the engine is certainly redundant

> The [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) allows writing from Apache Flink into an index of the [OpenSearch](https://opensearch.org/) engine (sink side). It does not support reading from the index (source side). The connector is quite a recent addition to the long list of connectors supported by Apache Flink and is available starting from release **1.16**. 

Author: Got it, changed to "OpenSearch index"

There are two API flavors that [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) supports: the DataStream API and the Table API. The Table API is the most convenient way to start off with OpenSearch, because it relies on SQL, which is familiar to many users. Follow the [official instructions](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.16/docs/connectors/table/opensearch/) to download the SQL flavor of the connector and deploy it in your Apache Flink cluster. 

## Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch in action

To set up an OpenSearch cluster, follow [OpenSearch installation instructions](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/opensearch/install/index/). The fastest way to get an OpenSearch cluster running locally is by spawning a [Docker container](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/opensearch/install/docker/).

```
docker run -d                           \
    -p 9200:9200                        \
    -p 9600:9600                        \
    -e "discovery.type=single-node"     \
    opensearchproject/opensearch:2.5.0
```

> The latest OpenSearch version as of today is **2.5.0**, however you can use [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) with any `1.x` or `2.x` OpenSearch version. 

Reviewer 2: @kolchfa-aws - Please link to the OpenSearch 2.5.0 blog: https://opensearch.org/blog/opensearch-2-5-is-live/

With the OpenSearch cluster up and running, you can use  [Apache Flink’s SQL Client](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/sqlclient/) to create a table backed by OpenSearch. The following SQL statement creates an Apache Flink table definition (`myUserTable`) pointing to an OpenSearch index `users`:

```
CREATE TABLE myUserTable (
  user_id STRING,
  user_name STRING,
  uv BIGINT,
  pv BIGINT,
  PRIMARY KEY (user_id) NOT ENFORCED
) WITH (
  'connector' = 'opensearch',
  'hosts' = 'https://localhost:9200',
  'username' = 'admin',
  'password' = 'admin',
  'allow-insecure' = 'true',
  'index' = 'users'
);
```

The `'connector' = 'opensearch'` parameter defines the type of connector. The `hosts`, `username` and `password` define the target OpenSearch endpoint and authentication credentials.
By default, OpenSearch distributions come with security turned on, meaning communication over HTTPS and mandatory username / password authentication. The `allow-insecure` connector option allows connecting to clusters which use self-signed certificates. 
The `index` parameter defines the target OpenSearch index.

> What happens if we insert some data into the table? 

Author: > is there a way we can rephrase it to match the tone of the rest of the example?

How about that: "You may be wondering what happens if we insert some data into the table? Let us see."

> What happens if we insert some data into the table? 

Reviewer 3: I like it! But no question mark, and let's use a contraction at the end: "You may be wondering what happens if we insert some data into the table. Let's see."

                        Map.entry("pv", element.f3)
                    )));
                })
        .setConnectionUsername("admin")
        .setConnectionPassword("admin")
        .setAllowInsecure(true)
        .setBulkFlushMaxActions(1)
        .build();

source.sinkTo(sink);
env.execute("OpenSearch end to end sink test example"); 
```

Like in the previous example, the data should appear in the OpenSearch `users` index.

## How can people get involved if they want to contribute to the Flink connector?

Since the [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) is hosted under the [Apache Software Foundation](https://www.apache.org/), anyone could contribute to it. 

The process is very simple:

* Create a [JIRA issue](https://issues.apache.org/jira/projects/FLINK)
* Submit a pull request to the [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch repo](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/)
* Optionally, once pull request is merged, ask for a connector release by following the [release process](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/Creating+a+flink-connector+release)

> Apache Flink has a large community and is being actively developed. Even though reviewing and merging changes may take some time, it should not discourage anyone from contributing. One of the interesting new features being developed is the implementation of a new generation of sinks based on [FLIP-171: Async Sink](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-171%3A+Async+Sink) proposal. The [related pull request](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/pull/5) is already open, so please feel free to check it out and contribute! 

Author: @natebower the suggestion is changing the meaning of the sentence. "Apache Flink has a large community and is being actively developed" - the emphasis here is that project is not dead and under active development. Changing that to "Flink has a large and actively developing community" reads like community is being developed?

> Apache Flink has a large community and is being actively developed. Even though reviewing and merging changes may take some time, it should not discourage anyone from contributing. One of the interesting new features being developed is the implementation of a new generation of sinks based on [FLIP-171: Async Sink](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-171%3A+Async+Sink) proposal. The [related pull request](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/pull/5) is already open, so please feel free to check it out and contribute! 

Reviewer 3: @reta That makes sense. In that case, how about "Flink has a large community, and the project is being actively developed"?

---
layout: post

> title:  "Apache Flink® Connector for OpenSearch®"

Reviewer 5: @reta for visibility. Please let me know of any questions.

> title:  "Apache Flink® Connector for OpenSearch®"

Author: @jhmcintyre Following the ASF trademark guide we use to add the ® to the most prominent and first text occurrence of a product [1]

[1] https://www.apache.org/foundation/marks/#principles

> title:  "Apache Flink® Connector for OpenSearch®"

Reviewer 5: Thanks @reta. I read the Apache guidelines as referring to using the full name (i.e. rather than just "Flink") on first and most prominent usage, rather that specifying inclusion of trademark symbols, per [2]. That said, for this post, can we agree on including trademark symbols on the first usage in the body copy, and removing from headline and later appearances in body copy that I've flagged?

[2] https://www.apache.org/foundation/marks/guide

> title:  "Apache Flink® Connector for OpenSearch®"

Author: :+1:

authors:
- ftisiot
- reta

> date: 2022-01-31

Reviewer 6: sorry - one more edit - can you edit the date? @reta

categories:
 - technical-post

> excerpt: "Apache Flink® and OpenSearch® are widely known and successful open source projects. Even if you have never used them, it is likely you have heard or read about them in search or streaming data transformation use cases. And there are reasons for that: although they target different tech markets, they perform their job very well."

Author: :+1:

> meta_keywords: "Apache Flink Connector to OpenSearch, open source data processing, Aiven for Apache Flink"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
meta_keywords: "Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch, open-source data processing, Aiven for Apache Flink"
```

> meta_description: "Learn how Aiven uses the Apache Flink Connector data processing solution to write from Apache Flink to an index of the OpenSearch engine."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
meta_description: "Learn how Aiven uses the Apache Flink Connector data processing solution to write from Apache Flink into an OpenSearch index."
```

---

> Apache Flink® and OpenSearch® are widely known and successful open source projects. Even if you have never used them, it is likely you have heard or read about them in search or streaming data transformation use cases. And there are reasons for that: although they target different tech markets, they perform their job very well. 

Author: This is a first usage, keeping it as per https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/pull/1300#discussion_r1096446340

Aiven applies dogfooding: Aiven runs on Aiven, meaning that we operate on the same data infrastructure we offer to our clients. Our standard approach is to evaluate open-source solutions for our internal needs, gain experience, make them robust, and then, once we’re confident, offer them to our clients. 

We took the same approach with Flink, which was chosen because it’s open source (Aiven loves open source, and we have a [dedicated OSPO team](https://aiven.io/blog/aivens-open-source-program-office)) and because it has a large, varied, and supportive community.

On the technical side, Flink has all the qualifications to become the de facto standard in data processing because it:

* Unifies unbounded and bounded data pipelines, making the transition from batch to streaming a matter of just redefining data sources/sinks.
* Decouples compute from data storage, meaning that it's possible to change the backend without needing to re-architect the transformation layer.
* Scales both vertically and horizontally to accommodate large workloads.
* Offers a rich SQL interface that covers all our data transformations needs.
* Offers a variety of language SDKs at various abstraction levels.

> * Works natively with other open-source tools like PostgreSQL®, Apache Kafka®, and now OpenSearch.

Author: As per https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/pull/1300#discussion_r1096446340, keeping trademarks on the first usage

## What is the best way to get started with Flink?

[Apache Flink’s documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/) is awesome because it covers both the theory behind the tool and the tool's practical usage in great detail.

To start defining the first data pipelines, it might be helpful to use the highest level of abstraction in Flink, represented by its SQL layer. You can experiment with a [Docker version of Flink](https://github.com/aiven/sql-cli-for-apache-flink-docker), which offers bare-bones capabilities, or explore a slicker experience on [Aiven for Apache Flink](https://aiven.io/flink?utm_source=blog&utm_medium=organic&utm_campaign=blog_opensearch_flink_opensearch_connector).

If you’re looking for a practical example, check out [how to build a real-time alerting solution](https://docs.aiven.io/docs/products/flink/howto/real-time-alerting-solution) with Apache Flink and a few SQL statements.

## What does the Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch do?

> The [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) allows writing from Apache Flink into [OpenSearch](https://opensearch.org/) index (sink side). It does not support reading from the index (source side). The connector is a recent addition to the long list of connectors supported by Apache Flink and is available starting with release **1.16**. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) allows writing from Apache Flink into an [OpenSearch](https://opensearch.org/) index (sink side). It does not support reading from the index (source side). The connector is a recent addition to the long list of connectors supported by Apache Flink and is available starting with release **1.16**. 
```

There are two API flavors that the [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) supports: the DataStream API and the Table API. The Table API is the most convenient way to start off with OpenSearch, because it relies on SQL, which is familiar to many users. Follow the [official instructions](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.16/docs/connectors/table/opensearch/) to download the SQL flavor of the connector and deploy it in your Apache Flink cluster. 

## The Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch in action

To set up an OpenSearch cluster, follow the [OpenSearch installation instructions](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/opensearch/install/index/). The fastest way to get an OpenSearch cluster running locally is by spawning a [Docker container](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/opensearch/install/docker/):

```
docker run -d                           \
    -p 9200:9200                        \
    -p 9600:9600                        \
    -e "discovery.type=single-node"     \
    opensearchproject/opensearch:2.5.0
```

> The latest OpenSearch version is **2.5.0**; however, you can use the [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) with any `1.x` or `2.x` OpenSearch version. 

Reviewer: @reta: could you please update this sentence with a link to the blog:
```suggestion
The latest OpenSearch version is [**2.5.0**](https://opensearch.org/blog/opensearch-2-5-is-live/); however, you can use the [Apache Flink Connector for OpenSearch](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-opensearch/) with any `1.x` or `2.x` OpenSearch version. 
```
